---
layout: default
title: Bible Translation 3.0
permalink: /translation/index.html
---

![Bible Translation 3.0]({{ '/assets/img/tyndale-john.jpg' | prepend: site.baseurl }})

This document describes the implications of the return of the authority
for and ownership of the process of Bible translation worldwide to the
global Church. It describes the “historical era” (pre-1800s) of Bible
translation (p. 5) and suggests that during this era, Bible translation
was generally undertaken by translators who translated the biblical
texts into their own languages. In the early 1800s, the Church
established Bible societies to increase the availability of Bible
translations at the lowest possible cost (p. 6). Bible translation in
this “1.0” era was often connected with the missionary and evangelistic
endeavors. Translation projects were generally undertaken by people
translating into a second language and managed by parachurch
organizations.

In the 1980s, a shift toward “Bible translation 2.0” began, with greater
involvement of the Church and native speakers of the target
language.This document suggests that the transition to a fully
Church-owned and Church-governed Bible translation movement is al- ready
underway, referred to here as “Bible translation 3.0” (p. 6-7).

Over 4,000 living languages do not have any translated Scripture (p. 8).
This document argues that from a biblical basis, each language is of
equal value, independent of its number of speakers or viability, and
that the Church in each language should be able to have as much
translated Scripture as they desire (p. 9). It further suggests that
departing from reliance on an institutional model for Bible translation
opens up unprecedented opportunities for the global Church to directly
meet their own need for translated Scripture in every language (p. 11).

The document then describes ten aspects of Bible translation that are
directly affected by the foundational shift to a Church-owned and
governed movement (p. 14). These areas are: the assessment and
prioritization of translation projects (p. 15), training and resources
(p. 16), process and methodology (p. 17), technology tools (p. 19),
checking (p. 20), certification (p. 21), publishing (p. 23),
distribution (p. 24), counting and statistics (p. 26), and funding (p.
28).

One of the most pivotal issues in Bible translation pertains to the
ownership of God’s Word and the answer to the question: **“Is the Bible
the common property of the Church?”** (p. 29). This question is considered
in light of how and when the Bible became restricted by copyright. The
document then addresses the question: **“Does the Bible need to be
protected?”** (p. 33). The implications of these topics are exceedingly
important for Bible translation and addressed in detail (p. 39) before
considering the role of parachurch organizations in the Digital Age (p.
42) and describing new opportunities in publishing and authentication
(p. 45).

Finally, the paper concludes by addressing three key aspects of a
Church-centric Bible translation movement—unrestricted biblical
resources (p. 47), translation training, translation tools (p. 48)—and a
strategy for making all of it available in the
[gateway languages]({{ '/gateway' | prepend: site.baseurl }}) of the world 
so that the global Church can rapidly collaborate together to meet their 
own needs.

<a class="button" href="{{ site.baseurl }}{{ site.data.assets.translation30-pdf.url }}">Download PDF</a><br /><small>Current document revision: **{{ site.data.assets.translation30-pdf.rev }}**</small>
